<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter IV</h2>
			<p>As for the delights, commodities, mysteries, with other concernments of this order, we are unwilling to fly them over, in the short deliveries of <i>Virgil</i>, <i>Varro</i>, or others, and shall therefore enlarge with additional ampliations.</p>
			<p>By this position they had a just proportion of Earth, to supply an equality of nourishment. The distance being ordered, thick or thin, according to the magnitude or vigorous attraction of the plant, the goodnesse, leannesse, or propriety of the soyle, and therefore the rule of <i>Solon</i>, concerning the territory of <i>Athens</i>, not extendible unto all; allowing the distance of six foot unto common Trees, and nine for the Figge and Olive.</p>
			<p>They had a due diffusion of their roots on both sides, whereby they maintained some proportion to <a id="page162">their</a> height, in Trees of large radication. For that they strictly make good their profundeur or depth unto their height, according to common conceit, and that expression of <i>Virgil</i>,<a href="#note1" id="b1"><sup>1</sup></a> though confirmable from the plane Tree in <i>Pliny</i>,<a href="#note2" id="b2"><sup>[2]</sup></a> and some few examples, is not to be expected from the generation of Trees almost in any kinde, either of side-spreading, or tap-roots:<a href="#note3" id="b3"><sup>{3}</sup></a> Except we measure them by lateral and opposite diffusions; nor commonly to be found in <i>minor</i> or hearby plants; If we except Sea-holly, Liquorish, Sea-rush, and some others.</p>
			<p>They had a commodious radiation in their growth; and a due expansion of their branches, for shadow or delight. For trees thickly planted, do runne up in height and branch with no expansion, shooting unequally or short, and thinne upon the neighbouring side. And therefore Trees are inwardly bare, and spring, and leaf from the outward and Sunny side of their branches.</p>
			<p>Whereby they also avoided the peril of συνολεθρισμὸς, or one tree <a id="page163">perishing</a> with another, as it happeneth ofttimes from the sick <i>effluviums</i> or entanglements of the roots, falling foul with each other. Observable in Elmes set in hedges, where if one dieth the neighbouring Tree prospereth not long after.</p>
			<p>In this situation divided into many intervals and open unto six passages, they had the advantage of a fair perflation from windes, brushing and cleansing their surfaces, relaxing and closing their pores unto due perspiration. For that they afford large <i>effluviums</i> perceptible from odours, diffused at great distances, is observable from Onyons out of the earth; which though dry, and kept until the spring, as they shoot forth large and many leaves, do notably abate of their weight. And mint growing in glasses of water, until it arriveth unto the weight of an ounce, in a shady place, will sometimes exhaust a pound of water.</p>
			<p>And as they send forth much, so may they receive somewhat in: For beside the common way and road of reception <a id="page164">by</a> the root, there may be a refection and imbibition from without; For gentle showrs refresh plants, though they enter not their roots; And the good and bad <i>effluviums</i> of Vegetables, promote or debilitate each other. So <i>Epithymum</i> and <i>Dodder</i>, rootlesse and out of the ground, maintain themselves upon Thyme, Savory, and plants, whereon they hang. And <i>Ivy</i> divided from the root, we have observed to live some years, by the cirrous parts commonly conceived but as tenacles and holdfasts unto it. The stalks of mint cropt from the root stripped from the leaves, and set in <i>glasses</i> with the root end upward, &amp; out of the water, we have observed to send forth sprouts and leaves without the aid of roots, and <i>scordium</i> to grow in like manner, the leaves set downward in water. To omit severall Sea-plants, which grow on single roots from stones, although in very many there are side-shoots and <i>fibres</i>, beside the fastening root.</p>
			<p>By this open position they were fairly exposed unto the rayes of Moon and Sunne, so considerable in the growth of <a id="page165">Vegetables.</a> For though Poplars, Willows, and severall Trees be made to grow about the brinks of <i>Acharon</i>, and dark habitations of the dead; Though some plants are content to grow in obscure Wells; wherein also old Elme pumps afford sometimes long bushy sprouts, not observable in any above-ground: And large fields of Vegetables are able to maintain their verdure at the bottome and shady part of the Sea; yet the greatest number are not content without the actual rayes of the Sunne, but bend, incline, and follow them; As large lists of solisequious and Sun-following plants. And some observe the method of its motion in their owne growth and conversion twining towards the West by the South,<a href="#note4" id="b4"><sup>{4}</sup></a> as Bryony, Hops, Woodbine, and several kindes of Bindeweed, which we shall more admire; when any can tell us, they observe another motion, and Twist by the North at the <i>Antipodes</i>. The same plants rooted against an erect North-wall full of holes, will finde a <a id="page166">way</a> through them to look upon the Sunne. And in tender plants from mustard seed, sown in the winter, and in a plot of earth placed inwardly against a South-window, the tender stalks of two leaves arose not erect, but bending towards the window, nor looking much higher then the Meridian Sun. And if the pot were turned they would work themselves into their former declinations, making their conversion by the East. That the Leaves of the Olive and some other Trees solstitially turn, and precisely tell us, when the Sun is entred <i>Cancer</i>, is scarce expectable in any Climate; and <i>Theophrastus</i> warily observes it;<a href="#note5" id="b5"><sup>[5]</sup></a> Yet somewhat thereof is observable in our own, in the leaves of Willows and Sallows, some weeks after the Solstice. But the great <i>Convolvulus</i> or white-flower’d <i>Bindweed</i> observes both motions of the Sunne, while the flower twists Æquinoctionally from the left hand to the right, according to the daily revolution; The stalk twineth ecliptically from the right to the left, according to the annual conversion.<a href="#note6" id="b6"><sup>{6}</sup></a></p>
			<p><a id="page167">Some</a> commend the exposure of these orders unto the Western gales, as the most generative and fructifying breath of heaven. But we applaud the Husbandry of <i>Solomon</i>, whereto agreeth the doctrine of <i>Theophrastus</i>. Arise O North-winde, and blow thou South upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; For the North-winde closing the pores, and shutting up the <i>effluviums</i>, when the South doth after open and relax them; the Aromatical gummes do drop, and sweet odours fly actively from them. And if his garden had the same situation, which mapps, and charts afford it, on the East side of <i>Jerusalem</i>, and having the wall on the West; these were the windes, unto which it was well exposed.</p>
			<p>By this way of plantation they encreased the number of their trees, which they lost in <i>Quaternio’s</i>, and square-orders, which is a commodity insisted on by <i>Varro</i>,<a href="#note7" id="b7"><sup>{7}</sup></a> and one great intent of nature, in this position of flowers and seeds in the elegant formation of plants, and the former Rules observed in naturall <a id="page168">and</a> artificiall Figurations.</p>
			<p>Whether in this order and one Tree in some measure breaking the cold, and pinching gusts of windes from the other, trees will not better maintain their inward circles, and either escape or moderate their excentricities, may also be considered. For the circles in Trees are naturally concentricall, parallell unto the bark, and unto each other, till frost and piercing wines contract and close them on the weatherside, the opposite semicircle widely enlarging, and at a comely distance, which hindreth ofttimes the beauty and roundnesse of Trees, and makes the Timber lesse serviceable; whiles the ascending juyce not readily passing, settles in knots and inequalities. And therefore it is no new course of Agriculture, to observe the native position of Trees according to North and South in their transplantations.<a href="#note8" id="b8"><sup>{[8]}</sup></a></p>
			<p>The same is also observable underground in the circinations and sphærical rounds of Onyons, wherein the circles of the Orbes are ofttimes larger, <a id="page169">and</a> the meridionall lines stand wider upon one side then the other. And where the largenesse will make up the number of planetical Orbes, that of <i>Luna</i>, and the lower planets excede the dimensions of <i>Saturne</i>, and the higher: Whether the like be not verified in the Circles of the large roots of Briony and Mandrakes, or why in the knotts of Deale or Firre the Circles are often eccentricall, although not in a plane, but vertical and right position, deserves a further enquiry.</p>
			<p>Whether there be not some irregularity of roundnesse in most plants according to their position? Whether some small compression of pores be not perceptible in parts which stand against the current of waters, as in Reeds, Bullrushes, and other vegetables toward the streaming quarter, may also be observed, and therefore such as are long and weak, are commonly contrived into a roundnesse of figure, whereby the water presseth lesse, and slippeth more smoothly from them, and even in flags of flat-figured leaves, the greater part <a id="page170">obvert</a> their sharper sides unto the current in ditches.</p>
			<p>But whether plants which float upon the surface of the water, be for the most part of cooling qualities, those which shoot above it of heating vertues, and why? whether <i>Sargasso</i> for many miles floating upon the Western Ocean, or Sea-lettuce, and Phasganium at the bottome of our Seas, make good the like qualities? Why Fenny waters afford the hottest and sweetest plants, as Calamus, Cyperus, and Crowfoot, and mudd cast out of ditches most naturally produceth Arsmart, Why plants so greedy of water so little regard oyl? Why since many seeds contain much oyle within them, they endure it not well without, either in their growth or production? Why since Seeds shoot commonly under ground, and out of the ayre, those which are let fall in shallow glasses, upon the surface of the water, will sooner sprout then those at the bottome? And if the water be covered with oyle, those at the bottome will hardly sprout at all, we have not <a id="page171">room</a> to conjecture.</p>
			<p>Whether Ivy would not lesse offend the Trees in this clean ordination, and well kept paths, might perhaps deserve the question. But this were a quæry only unto some habitations, and little concerning <i>Cyrus</i> or the Babylonian territory; wherein by no industry <i>Harpalus</i> could make Ivy grow: And <i>Alexander</i> hardly found it about those parts to imitate the pomp of <i>Bacchus</i>.<a href="#note9" id="b9"><sup>[9]</sup></a> And though in these Northern Regions we are too much acquainted with one Ivy, we know too little of another, whereby we apprehend not the expressions of Antiquity, the Splenetick<a href="#note10" id="b10"><sup>10</sup></a> medicine of <i>Galen</i>, and the Emphasis of the Poet, in the beauty of the white Ivy.<a href="#note11" id="b11"><sup>11</sup></a></p>
			<p>The like concerning the growth of Misseltoe, which dependeth not only of the <i>species</i>, or kinde of Tree, but much also of the Soil. And therefore common in some places, not readily found in others, frequent in <i>France</i>, not so common in <i>Spain</i>, and scarce at all in the Territory of <i>Ferrara</i>: Nor easily to be found where it is most required <a id="page172">upon</a> Oaks, lesse on Trees continually verdant. Although in some places the Olive escapeth it not, requiting its detriment, in the delightfull view of its red Berries; as <i>Clusius</i> observed in <i>Spain</i>, and <i>Bellonius</i> about <i>Hierusalem</i>. But this Parasiticall plant suffers nothing to grow upon it, by any way of art; nor could we ever make it grow where nature had not planted it; as we have in vain attempted by inocculation and incision, upon its native or forreign stock. And though there seem nothing improbable in the seed, it hath not succeeded by sation in any manner of ground, wherein we had no reason to despair, since we reade of vegetable horns, and how Rams horns will root about <i>Goa</i>.<a href="#note12" id="b12"><sup>12</sup></a></p>
			<p>But besides these rurall commodities, it cannot be meanly delectable in the variety of Figures, which these orders open, and closed do make. Whilest every inclosure makes a <i>Rhombus</i>, the figures obliquely taken a Rhomboides, the intervals bounded with parallell lines, and each intersection built upon <a id="page173">a</a> square, affording two Triangles or Pyramids vertically conjoyned; which in the strict Quincunciall order doe oppositely make acute and blunt Angles.</p>
			<p>And though therein we meet not with right angles, yet every Rhombus containing four Angles equall unto two right, it virtually contains two right in every one. Nor is this strange unto such as observe the naturall lines of Trees, and parts disposed in them. For neither in the root doth nature affect this angle, which shooting downward for the stability of the plant, doth best effect the same by Figures of Inclination; Nor in the Branches and stalky leaves, which grow most at acute angles; as declining from their head the root, and diminishing their Angles with their altitude: Verified also in lesser Plants, whereby they better support themselves, and bear not so heavily upon the stalk: So that while near the root they often make an Angle of seventy parts, the sprouts near the top will often come short of <a id="page174">thirty.</a> Even in the nerves and master veins of the leaves the acute angle ruleth; the obtuse but seldome found, and in the backward part of the leaf, reflecting and arching about the stalk. But why ofttimes one side of the leaf is unequall unto the other, as in Hazell and Oaks, why on either side the master vein the lesser and derivative channels not directly opposite, nor at equall angles, respectively unto the adverse side, but those of one part do often exceed the other, as the Wallnut and many more deserves another enquiry.</p>
			<p>Now if for this order we affect coniferous and tapering Trees, particularly the Cypresse, which grows in a conicall figure; we have found a Tree not only of great Ornament, but in its Essentials of affinity unto this order. A solid Rhombus being made by the conversion of two Equicrurall cones, as <i>Archimedes</i> hath defined. And these were the common Trees about <i>Babylon</i>, and the East, whereof the Ark was made; and <i>Alexander</i> found no Trees so accomodable to build his <a id="page175">Navy;</a> And this we rather think to be the Tree mentioned in the Canticles, which stricter Botanology will hardly allow to be Camphire.<a href="#note13" id="b13"><sup>[13]</sup></a></p>
			<p>And if delight or ornamentall view invite a comely disposure by circular amputations, as is elegantly performed in Hawthorns; then will they answer the figures made by the conversion of a Rhombus, which maketh two concentricall Circles; the greater circumference being made by the lesser angles, the lesser by the greater.</p>
			<p>The Cylindrical figure of Trees is virtually contained and latent in this order. A Cylinder or long round being made by the conversion or turning of a Parallelogram, and most handsomely by a long square, which makes an equall, strong and lasting figure in Trees, agreeable unto the body and motive parts of animals, the greatest number of Plants, and almost all roots, though their stalks be angular, and of many corners, which seem not to follow the figure of their Seeds; Since many angular Seeds send forth round stalks, and sphæricall seeds <a id="page176">arise</a> from angular spindles, and many rather conform unto their Roots, as the round stalks of bulbous Roots, and in tuberous Roots stemmes of like figure. But why since the largest number of Plants maintain a circular Figure, there are so few with teretous or longround leaves; why coniferous Trees are tenuifolious or narrowleafed, why Plants of few or no joynts have commonly round stalks, why the greatest number of hollow stalks are round stalks; or why in this variety of angular stalks the quadrangular most exceedeth, were too long a speculation; Mean while obvious experience may finde, that in Plants of divided leaves above, nature often beginneth circularly in the two first leaves below, while in the singular plant of Ivy, she exerciseth a contrary Geometry, and beginning with angular leaves below, rounds them in the upper branches.</p>
			<p>Nor can the rows in this order want delight, as carrying an aspect answerable unto the <i>dipteros hypœthros</i>, or double order of columns open above; the <a id="page177">opposite</a> ranks of Trees standing like pillars in the <i>Cavedia</i> of the Courts of famous buildings, and the <i>Portico</i>’s of the <i>Templa subdialia</i> of old; Somewhat imitating the <i>Peristylia</i> or Cloyster buildings, and the <i>Exedræ</i> of the Ancients, wherein men discoursed, walked and exercised; For that they derived the rule of Columnes from Trees, especially in their proportionall diminutions, is illustrated by <i>Vitruvius</i> from the shaftes of Firre and Pine.<a href="#note14" id="b14"><sup>[14]</sup></a> And though the inter-arboration do imitate the <i>Areostylos</i>, or thin order, not strictly answering the proportion of intercolumniations; yet in many Trees they will not exceed the intermission of the Columnes in the Court of the Tabernacle; which being an hundred cubits long, and made up by twenty pillars, will afford no lesse then intervals of five cubits.</p>
			<p>Beside, in this kinde of aspect the sight being not diffused but circumscribed between long parallels and the ἐπισκιασμὸς and adumbration from the branches, it frameth a penthouse over the eye, and maketh a quiet vision: And <a id="page178">therefore</a> in diffused and open aspects, men hollow their hand above their eye, and make an artificiall brow, whereby they direct the dispersed rayes of sight, and by this shade preserve a moderate light in the chamber of the eye; keeping the <i>pupilla</i> plump and fair, and not contracted or shrunk as in light and vagrant vision.</p>
			<p>And therefore providence hath arched and paved the great house of the world, with colours or mediocrity, that is, blew and green, above and below the sight, moderately terminating the <i>acies</i> of the eye. For most plants, though green above ground, maintain their Originall white below it, according to the candour of their seminall pulp, and the rudimental leaves do first appear in that colour; observable in Seeds sprouting in water upon their first foliation. Green seeming to be the first supervenient, or above-ground complexion of Vegetables, separable in many upon ligature or inhumation, as Succory, Endive, Artichoaks, and which is also lost upon fading in the Autumn.</p>
			<p><a id="page179">And</a> this is also agreeable unto water it self, the alimental vehicle of plants, which first altereth into this colour; And containing many vegetable seminalities, revealeth their Seeds by greennesse; and therefore soonest expected in rain or standing water, not easily found in distilled or water strongly boiled; wherein the Seeds are extinguished by fire and decoction, and therefore last long and pure without such alteration, affording neither uliginous coats, gnatworms, Acari, hair-worms, like crude and common water; and therefore most fit for wholsome beverage, and with malt makes Ale and Beer without boyling. What large water-drinkers some Plants are, the Canary-Tree and Birches in some Northern Countries, drenching the Fields about them do sufficiently demonstrate. How water it self is able to maintain the growth of Vegetables, and without extinction of their generative or medicall vertues; Beside the experiment of <i>Helmonts</i> tree, we have found in some which have lived six years in glasses. The seeds of Scurvy-grasse <a id="page180">growing</a> in waterpots, have been fruitfull in the Land; and <i>Asarum</i> after a years space, and once casting its leaves, hath handsomely performed its vomiting operation.</p>
			<p>Nor are only dark and green colors, but shades and shadows contrived through the great Volume of nature, and trees ordained not only to protect and shadow others, but by their shades and shadowing parts, to preserve and cherish themselves. The whole radiation or branchings shadowing the stock and the root, the leaves, the branches and fruit, too much exposed to the windes and scorching Sunne. The calicular leaves inclose the tender flowers, and the flowers themselves lye wrapt about the seeds, in their rudiment and first formations, which being advanced the flowers fall away; and are therefore contrived in variety of figures, best satisfying the intention; Handsomely observable in hooded and gaping flowers, and the Butterfly bloomes of leguminous plants, the lower leaf closely involving the <a id="page181">rudimental</a> Cod, and the alary or wingy divisions embracing or hanging over it.</p>
			<p>But Seeds themselves do lie in perpetual shades, either under the leaf, or shut up in coverings; And such as lye barest, have their husks, skins, and pulps about them, wherein the nebbe and generative particle lyeth moist and secured from the injury of Ayre and Sunne. Darknesse and light hold interchangeable dominions, and alternately rule the seminall state of things. Light unto <i>Pluto</i><a href="#note15" id="b15"><sup>15</sup></a> is darknesse unto <i>Jupiter</i>. Legions of seminall <i>Idæa</i>’s lye in their second Chaos and <i>Orcus</i> of <i>Hippocrates</i>; till putting on the habits of their forms, they shew themselves upon the stage of the world, and open dominion of <i>Jove</i>. They that held the Stars of heaven were but rayes and flashing glimpses of the Empyreall light, through holes and perforations of the upper heaven, took of the natural shadows of stars, while according to better discovery<a href="#note16" id="b16"><sup>16</sup></a> the poor Inhabitants of the Moone have but a polary life, and must passe half their <a id="page182">dayes</a> in the shadow of that Luminary.</p>
			<p>Light that makes things seen, makes some things invisible, were it not for darknesse and the shadow of the earth, the noblest part of the Creation had remained unseen, and the Stars in heaven as invisible as on the fourth day, when they were created above the Horizon, with the Sun, or there was not an eye to behold them. The greatest mystery of Religion is expressed by adumbration, and in the noblest part of Jewish Types, we finde the Cherubims shadowing the Mercy-seat:<a href="#note17" id="b17"><sup>[17]</sup></a> Life it self is but the shadow of death, and souls departed but the shadows of the living: All things fall under this name. The Sunne it self is but the dark <i>simulachrum</i>, and light but the shadow of God.</p>
			<p>Lastly, It is no wonder that this Quincunciall order was first and still affected as gratefull unto the Eye: For all things are seen Quincuncially; For at the eye the Pyramidal rayes from the object, receive a decussation, and so strike a second base upon the <i>Retina</i> or <a id="page183">hinder</a> coat, the proper organ of Vision; wherein the pictures from objects are represented, answerable to the paper, or wall in the dark chamber; after the decussation of the rayes at the hole of the hornycoat, and their refraction upon the Christalline humour, answering the <i>foramen</i> of the window, and the <i>convex</i> or burning-glasses, which refract the rayes that enter it. And if ancient Anatomy would hold, a like disposure there was of the optick or visual nerves in the brain, wherein Antiquity conceived a concurrence by decussation. And this not only observable in the laws of direct Vision, but in some part also verified in the reflected rayes of sight. For making the angle of incidence equal to that of reflexion, the visuall raye returneth Quincuncially, and after the form of a V, and the line of reflexion being continued unto the place of vision, there ariseth a semi-decussation, which makes the object seen in a perpendicular unto it self, and as farre below the reflectent, as it is from it above; <a id="page184">observable</a> in the Sun and Moon beheld in water.</p>
			<p>And this is also the law of reflexion in moved bodies and sounds, which though not made by decussation, observe the rule of equality between incidence and reflexion; whereby whispering places are framed by Ellipticall arches laid side-wise; where the voice being delivered at the <i>focus</i> of one extremity, observing an equality unto the angle of incidence, it will reflect unto the <i>focus</i> of the other end, and so escape the ears of the standers in the middle.</p>
			<p>A like rule is observed in the reflection of the vocall and sonorous line in Ecchoes, which cannot therefore be heard in all stations. But happening in woody plantations, by waters, and able to return some words; if reacht by a pleasant and well-dividing voice, there may be heard the softest notes in nature.</p>
			<p>And this not only verified in the way of sence, but in animall and intellectuall receptions. Things entring upon the intellect by a Pyramid from without, <a id="page185">and</a> thence into the memory by another from within, the common decussation being in the understanding as is delivered by <i>Bovillus</i>.<a href="#note18" id="b18"><sup>18</sup></a> Whether the intellectual and phantastical lines be not thus rightly disposed, but magnified diminished, distorted, and ill placed in the Mathematicks of some brains, whereby they have irregular apprehensions of things, perverted motions, conceptions, incurable hallucinations, were no unpleasant speculation.</p>
			<p>And if Ægyptian Philosophy may obtain, the scale of influences was thus disposed, and the geniall spirits of both worlds, do trace their way in ascending and descending Pyramids, mystically apprehended in the Letter X, and the open Bill and stradling Legges of a Stork, which was imitated by that Character.</p>
			<p>Of this Figure <i>Plato</i> made choice to illustrate the motion of the soul, both of the world and man; while he delivereth that God divided the whole conjunction length-wise, according to the figure of a Greek X, and then turning it about reflected it into a circle; By the circle <a id="page186">implying</a> the uniform motion of the first Orb, and by the right lines, the planetical and various motions within it.<a href="#note19" id="b19"><sup>[19]</sup></a> And this also with application unto the soul of man, which hath a double aspect, one right, whereby it beholdeth the body, and objects without; another circular and reciprocal, whereby it beholdeth it self. The circle declaring the motion of the indivisible soul, simple, according to the divinity of its nature, and returning into it self; the right lines respecting the motion pertaining unto sense, and vegetation, and the central decussation, the wondrous connexion of the severall faculties conjointly in one substance. And so conjoyned the unity and duality of the soul, and made out the three substances so much considered by him; That is, the indivisible or divine, the divisible or corporeal, and that third, which was the <i>Systasis</i> or harmony of those two, in the mystical decussation.</p>
			<p>And if that were clearly made out which <i>Justin Martyr</i> took for granted, this figure hath had the honour to characterize and notifie our blessed Saviour, as <a id="page187">he</a> delivereth in that borrowed expression from <i>Plato</i>; <i>Decussavit eum in universo</i>, the hint whereof he would have <i>Plato</i> derive from the figure of the brazen Serpent, and to have mistaken the Letter X for T, whereas it is not improbable, he learned these and other mystical expressions in his Learned Observations of Ægypt, where he might obviously behold the Mercurial characters, the handed crosses, and other mysteries not throughly understood in the sacred Letter X, which being derivative from the Stork, one of the ten sacred animals, might be originally Ægyptian, and brought into <i>Greece</i> by <i>Cadmus</i> of that Countrey.</p>
			<hr/>
			<hr/>
			<p class="center">NOTES</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b1" id="note1">1.</a> <i>Quantum vertice ad auras Æthereas, tantum radice ad tartara tendit.</i> [Vergil Æneid <a href="http://www.thelatinlibrary.com/vergil/aen4.shtml">445⁠–⁠46</a>, which reads “in Tartara”.]</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b2" id="note2">2.</a> [Pliny Historia Naturalis <a href="http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/L/Roman/Texts/Pliny_the_Elder/12*.html#9">XII.v.9</a>; englished by Holland, <a href="http://penelope.uchicago.edu/holland/pliny12.html#S9">Chap. I</a>. Pliny says that in this case the roots were far greater than the branches.]</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b3" id="note3">3.</a> {MS Sloan 1882: But their progression and motion in growth is not equall; the root making an earlier course in the length or multitude of fibres, according to the law of its species, and as it is to afford a supportation or nourishment unto the ascending parts of the plants; but in progression of increase, the stalk commonly outstrips the root, and even in trees the common opinion is questionable; as is expressed, <i>quantum ertice ad auras Ætherias, tantum radice ad Tartara tendit.</i> [in Wilkin]}</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b4" id="note4">4.</a> {<i>Flectat ad Aquilonem, et declinit ad Austrum</i>, is Solon’s description of the motion of the sun. MS. Sloan 1847}</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b5" id="note5">5.</a> [Theophrastus, Enquiry into Plants, <a href="https://www.loebclassics.com/view/theophrastus-enquiry_plants/1916/pb_LCL070.69.xml">I.X</a>.]</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b6" id="note6">6.</a> {Wilkin adds from MS Sloan 1847: Of the orchis or dogstones, one is generally more lusty, plump and fuller then the other, and the fullest is most commended. The reason is, the one which is fullest shootes; the stalk seems most directly to proceed from that one; the other is but as it were appendant, and doth but slight office to the nourishment; but whether they have any regular position north or south, or east and west, my experience does not discover.}</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b7" id="note7">7.</a> [Varro de Re Rustica <a href="http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Varro/de_Re_Rustica/1*.html#7">I.7</a>.]</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b8" id="note8">8.</a> [The usual explanation for this practice is to avoid burning the barks of transplanted trees by exposing them, insofar as is possible, to the same levels of insolation: east to east, south to south,and west to west. It is especially important that the original north side of a transplanted tree not be exposed to the sun without protection.] {The sap in trees observes the circle and right line. Trees being made to grow up tall, were made long and strong; of the strongest columnar figure, round. The lines are strongest for the most part, and in many equidistant, as in firs; the circles homocentrical, except perverted by situation; the circles on the northern, or side exposed to cold winds, being more contracted. In the knots of fir, the right lines broken from their course do run into homocentrical circles, whether in round or oval knots.⁠ ⁠… Trees set under a north wall will be larger circled than that side exposed unto the weather: trees set in open high places, near the sea, will close their circles on that side which respecteth it. — <i>MS. Sloan 1847</i>}</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b9" id="note9">9.</a> [See Plutarch, Alexander <a href="http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Alexander*/5.html#35.15">5.35.15</a>; Arrian, Anabasis <a href="http://websfor.org/alexander/arrian/book5a.asp">5a</a>; Theophrastus, On Plants, IV.iv.1:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p class="note" style="text-indent: 0em">In different parts of Asia also there are special trees, for the soil of the various regions produces some but not others. Thus they say that ivy and olive do not grow in Asia in the parts of Syria which are five days’ journey from the sea; but that in India ivy appears on the mountain called Meros, whence, according to the tale, Dionysus came. Wherefore it is said that Alexander when he came back from an expedition, was crowned with ivy, himself and his army. But elsewhere in Asia it is said to grow only in Media, for that country seems in a way to surround and join on to the Euxine sea. However, when Harpalus took great pains over and over again to plant it in the gardens of Babylon, and made a special point of it, he failed: since it could not live like the other things introduced from Hellas.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="note" style="text-indent: 0em">The text of Theophrastus is defective at several points. Cf. Plutarch, Quæst. Conviv. III.ii.1; in the English translation of Philemon Holland:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p class="note" style="text-indent: 0em">And that which is more is, (as <i>Theophrastus</i> hath left in writing) <i>Harpalus</i> the lieutenant generall under <i>Alexander</i> the Great, in the province of <i>Babylon</i>, by expresse order and direction from the king his master; endevoured and did what he might to set in the kings orchard there, certaine trees and plants which came out of <i>Greece</i>, and such especially as yeelded a goodly shade, caried large leaves, and were by nature cold; for that the countrey about <i>Babylon</i> is exceeding hot and scorched with the burning heat of the sunne; but the ground would never enterteine nor abide the Ivie onely; notwithstanding that <i>Harpalus</i> took great paines, and emploied most carefull diligence about it: for plant it as often as he would, it dried and died immediatly; and why? hotte it is of the owne nature, and was planted in a mould farre hotter than it selfe, which hindered it for taking root; for this is a generall and perpetuall rule: that all excessive enormities, of any object, destroy the force and powers of the subject: in which regard, they desire rather their contraries; in such sort, as that a plant of cold temperature requireth an hot place to grow in; and that which is hot demaundeth likewise a cold ground: and this is the reason, that high mountaine countries, windie, and covered with snow; beare ordinary trees that yeeld torch-wood and pitch, as pines, cone trees, and such like⁠ ⁠… ]</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="note">
				<a href="#b10" id="note10">10.</a>
				<i>Galen de med. secundum loc.</i>
			</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b11" id="note11">11.</a> <i>Hedera formosior alba.</i> [Virgil, Eclogues <a href="http://thelatinlibrary.com/vergil/ec7.shtml">VII</a>, 38, “prettier than white [or pearly, or pale] ivy”. This seems an odd comparison, even for an Arcadian shepherd, but there it is.]</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b12" id="note12">12.</a> <i>Linschoten</i>. [On the island of Goa, says Linschoten, horns of sheep and kine that are slaughtered lie scattered about; after a while, they take root “as if it were a tree, as I my selfe have seene and pulled forth many of them, that had rootes of two or three spannes in length, which was never seene in any place of the world.” Indeed. Linschoten continues, “The cause whereof hath beene sought and searched by many curious speculators of strange things, but they could never find it out, and yet the earth is verie stonie. Whereby those of Goa, most oftentimes take it in good part, to heare them selves reported to be the greatest Cornudos, or wearers of hornes, because hornes in other places may at once be put off but theirs of Goa have taken roote, and therfore it is impossible to cut them cleane away, for that because of the rootes, they will presently grow up againe, so that they must with patience beare them as long as they live.”]</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b13" id="note13">13.</a> [The ark: Genesis 6:14, “Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch”, where “gopher” is a transliteration of the Hebrew גפר, “kawfar”, to which the pitch כפר may be related; possibly cypress. The fleet of Alexander: see Arrian <a href="https://archive.org/stream/£269ArrianAnabasisOfAlexanderI57/£269-Arrian%20Anabasis%20of%20Alexander%20I%3A5-7#page/n277/mode/2up">VII.19</a>. Canticles: 1:14, “My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi,” and 4:13, “Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits; camphire, with spikenard⁠ ⁠…”, כפר, “kopher”; my dictionary weasels out by saying “the name of a plant”.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b14" id="note14">14.</a> [Vitruvius, <a href="http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Vitruvius/5*.html#1.3">V.1.3</a>.]</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b15" id="note15">15.</a> <i>Lux orco, tenebræ Jovi, tenebra orco, lux Jovi.</i> Hippocr. <i>de diæta.</i> [1658 has “Plato” for “Pluto”.]</p>
			<p class="note">
				<a href="#b16" id="note16">16.</a>
				<i>S. Hevelii Selenographia.</i>
			</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b17" id="note17">17.</a> [Hebrews 9:5, “And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat”, alluding to Exodus 25, especially 25:20: “And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be”.]</p>
			<p class="note">
				<a href="#b18" id="note18">18.</a>
				<i>Car. Bovillus de intellectu.</i>
			</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="#b19" id="note19">19.</a> <a href="http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/timaeus.html#579">Timaeus</a>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
